Brother van Elburg was a young Dutchman
raised during the post-World War I era,
who enjoyed life like all young men his age.
He loved playing chess
and following the latest football results
and was the proud father of two children
—his daughter, Henny, and his son, Fritz.
Together with his wife, Lies,
he created a cozy home for them,
which was located in the Azaleastraat,
in the city of Zwolle, in the Netherlands.
My parents had the habit
of studying together on Saturday evening,
and I had to read the first two paragraphs.
And I also had to answer the questions.
Well, this stayed with me
for the rest of my life.
Herman loved sharing the Bible’s message
of a peaceful future
with his fellow citizens of Zwolle,
showing that the day will come when nations
no longer will go to war against each other.
However,
things were about to change.
In 1939,
neighboring Germany started World War II.
Because the Nazis were set
on exterminating Jehovah’s Witnesses,
many of them had to flee the country.
Moved by unselfish love,
Herman opened his home to offer them shelter.
One day, my father said to my mother:
“Lies, I received a letter from the Society.
A brother is coming to stay with us.”
My mother said:
“Oh, Herman, this can’t go on like that.
We won’t be able to feed all of them.”
To which my father replied:
“But, Lies, I’m a butcher.
There will be enough meat for all.”
On May 10, 1940,
Germany invaded the Netherlands.
Now Herman and his family were also
at risk of falling prey to the Nazi regime.
Among their neighbors
was a family that was very active
in pro-German politics during the war.
Another man was responsible for the arrest
of a significant number of Jews.
In between these two
lived the van Elburg family.
Eventually, Herman was betrayed
to the police and was arrested.
His arrestors were determined
to get information concerning
the people he was helping.
The police resorted to violence,
beating him severely.
Because of his love for his fellow Christians
and his love for God,
Herman kept his lips sealed.
Mister van Elburg
never revealed any names.
During the war that meant
signing your own death warrant.
Not knowing what had happened
to her husband,
Lies van Elburg
went to the local police station.
While she was away,
the authorities raided their home.
Suddenly, the door flung open
and two men entered the room
and started moving things around.
They pushed a table to one side,
pulled up the carpet,
and started looking under the floor.
They found all the literature we had hidden,
as well as clothing of brothers,
which my father had hidden
in the cavity wall.
The authorities confiscated the literature
Herman had hidden in his home.
The literature found at his place
wasn’t his but that of his congregation,
but he never mentioned the names
of those who had brought it.
That to me makes this very special.
Unwilling to waver in their determination
to protect their fellow believers,
Herman and Lies van Elburg
were both imprisoned.
Together with my grandfather,
I visited my mother.
We had to walk across the huge courtyard.
While we were walking,
I suddenly heard, “Henny.”
And there was my father,
and he gave me an apple.
That’s the last I ever saw of my father.
Eventually, Herman and Lies
were sent to concentration camps.
Herman was sent to Dachau.
Lies was transferred
to the Ravensbrück concentration camp.
While she returned home after a while,
Herman van Elburg did not.
He died on February 17, 1943,
at the age of 30,
leaving behind
his bereaved wife and two children.
Of course,
the Witnesses as a whole
were deeply impacted by the war.
What really strikes me is that they
never considered themselves heroes.
Herman was one
of at least 132 Jehovah’s Witnesses
in the Netherlands
who died at the hands of the Nazi regime
for their belief in a better world
under the Kingdom of God.
All they had to do to be freed
was to renounce their faith or,
as in the case of Herman van Elburg,
simply provide names of fellow believers.
To love your brothers
more than you love yourself
—that really meant something to him.
Down to this very day,
I pray every day
that I may be just like them.